[John] Ackerson left us
down there to die.
No evac, no armor.
- ONI knew we wouldn't make it.
- [Halsey] The city fell.
What happened on Reach wasn't
personal, it was political.
- It was Parangosky.
- The ONI protects itself.
Make them your enemy,
and it won't matter
that you're Master Chief.
When did you leave ONI,
Admiral?
[Cortana]
Please, will you help him?
What are you prepared
to do for me?
What is the value
of this human thing?
Knowledge. Human knowledge.
- What do you know of the Demon?
- He remembers you.
You keep his memories.
Show me.
[Makee] You will be the one to
lead us to the Sacred Ring.
What must I do?
Believe in me.
I am the Blessed One.
Whatever built the Halo
left something in you.
[woman]
It's close now, the monster.
Find me, deliver me, save me.
Do not forsake your name,
Protector.
[Laera]
Where did you get this?
[boy] A boy gave it to me.
- Where is he?
- They took him away.
- [Soren] Who took Kessler?
- The UNSC.
[John]
His name was Vannak-134.
I will find the ones
who caused your death.
And I will end them.
This was my family, my friends!
There's no training for this!
[powerful thrust]
[Kai]
I can't stay and watch.
Are you suggesting I deploy
Silver Team without its leader?
Just me, till John's cleared.
[Ackerson] You and I both know
he's not himself.
[heavy doors open]
[dramatic music rises]
[heels shift en masse]
[dramatic music swells]
[man] Whiskey-uniform one-one.
This is Phoenix.
Maintain speed.
[overlapping comms chatter]
[Mullins]
This is what we've trained for.
It's time to pay them back.
[door mechanism whirrs]
[Perez breathing heavily]
[comms chatter]
- [Mullins] Perez.
- [sharp gasp]
You bounce off that hull,
you're gonna spend
your last two hours spinning
into space, and I'm gonna
have to write a report
about what a dumbass you are.
And I hate writing reports.
[Perez]
You ain't gonna write about me.
[woman, over comms]
Assault Unit Javelin,
you are clear for jump.
[Mullins] First squad,
on the beam!
- Spartans!
- [all] Never die!
- [Mullins] Spartans!
- [Perez] Never die.
- [Mullins] On me.
- [man] Godspeed, Spartans.
[breathing heavily]
[Mullins] Javelin-Two,
check your angle.
Maintain formation.
Watch your line!
[whooshing]
[indistinct comms chatter]
- [Perez] Shit.
- [Mullins] Perez!
What the hell are you doing?
- Get back into position.
- [Perez] Put it in your report.
[Mullins] You're not
the only one out here!
- [loud thudding]
- [grunts]
- [Gilroy] High-velocity plasma!
- [Spartan III screams]
- [grunting]
- [Mullins] This is Javelin.
Taking sustained fire
from the Covenant Corvette.
- [Spartan III] Singh's gone!
- [Spartan III] They have a lock.
- [Spartan III] They see us!
- Maintain your lines!
[panting]
[Gilroy] Unknown
number of turrets tracking.
[man, on comms] Javelin Team,
maintain dispersion.
- [Spartan III screams]
- [Mullins] Don't overlap!
- [Spartan III] Break right!
- [panting] Shit, shit.
[Mullins]
On target in three, two, one...
- [indistinct radio chatter]
- [gasping]
[Mullins] Phoenix,
this is Javelin-One.
Phase One complete.
Initiating Phase Two.
[Spartan III]
Fire in the hole!
- [Perez] Wilco, armed!
- [explosion, Perez grunts]
- [Mullins] Bounding overlap.
- [Perez gasping]
- [Okada] Barrier deployed.
- [Spartan III] Move! Move!
[indistinct shout over comms]
[Mullins]
The bridge is on this deck!
[Spartan III, over comms]
Hit him back!
[Perez] Mark smoke
on the deck! Stay back!
- [soldiers grunt]
- [Spartan III] Hayes is down!
- [Perez] Medic!
- [Spartan] Movement on our six!
- [Mullins] We gotta move!
- [Perez] Moving!
- [Okada] Gilroy's smoked!
- [Mullins] Now, Perez! Let's go!
- [Mullins] On me!
- [Perez] Move! Move!
[indistinct shouting]
[Perez] Bridge! Break right!
[Mullins] Move! Go!
- [Mullins] Who's got the spike?
- [Perez] Gilroy! Cover me!
[grunts]
[groans]
- [Okada] You good?
- [Perez] I'm good.
[Okada] Move it!
[Perez] I have it!
[explosion, scream]
[Perez]
Okada's down!
[Mullins] Go! Go!
- [Perez] Frag out!
- [explosion]
- Move!
- [Mullins] Go! Go!
Check your corners.
[Perez panting]
Clear.
[Mullins] I told you,
only rookies say "clear."
[Perez]
And I told you to kiss my--
- [sharp gasp]
- [Perez] Mullins!
[Mullins] Finish it!
[needles whirring]
- [explosion]
- [Perez gasps]
[Perez] Fleet Command,
this is Javelin-Four.
I'm the last one left.
Preparing to spike.
Stand by to connect.
- [explosion]
- [sharp gasp]
[Spartan III]
We don't have it!
[whispers] Goddamn it.
[Mullins]
Take it easy, Spartan.
[door opens]
[soldiers muttering]
[clamor stops]
[Kai] You're all dead.
Again.
The Covenant's
advanced shielding
means that we lose three ships
for every one of these.
Their targeting system
is superior as well.
But that is also their weakness.
Playback, please.
They have no problem
locking onto our attack ships.
But they're less effective
against smaller targets.
That's you.
I can take down an Elite
at 2,500 meters.
But my rifle is useless
against a swarm of bees.
So we're bees now?
You wish.
Bees work together.
Many bodies. One mind.
One mission.
Infiltrate the ship.
Deliver the spike.
The bridge is the nerve center.
[graphics hum]
It's protected on the outside,
not on the inside.
Not from this.
Our intel indicates
that their system
is vulnerable to override.
This spike delivers a virus.
Full system shutdown.
Lights out.
Like a bullet to the brain.
[soft chuckle]
[sighs]
Do you have something you would
like to add, Spartan?
Yeah.
I'd like to add
it's bullshit, ma'am.
We cleared the enemy.
Those rounds came
out of nowhere.
The simulation is random.
So is war.
Dismissed.
[doors slide open]
[Perez] Hey! Hey!
[Kai] Let me be clear.
We are not equals.
I am your instructor.
Do you have a problem with me?
I have a problem with failure.
I have a problem with soldiers
that continue
to repeat mistakes,
jeopardizing not only
their mission
but the lives
of their comrades.
My comrades were all dead.
Is it personal?
Is it 'cause I was on Reach
and you weren't?
One battle doesn't
make you a veteran.
Just makes you lucky.
[Perez]
I know what I signed up for.
Are you telling me
you want to die, Spartan?
No, ma'am.
[dramatic music playing]
[tea service clatters]
[Parangosky]
They grew leaves like these
on a small family orchard
in a place called Sri Lanka,
on Earth.
Dried in the sun,
then borne on the back
of the father 16 miles.
His brown feet, that red earth.
Sold at auction...
then placed upon shoulders,
then upon ships,
then upon seas.
Packaged, purchased,
and poured
into this fragile cup,
just for your lips.
They shouldn't have.
They didn't.
These leaves were actually
engineered in a lab
on Level Four.
Oh?
And why would the ONI
concern itself with making tea?
Because I told them to.
The point is, you drink the tea,
but what you taste is the story.
Stories are important,
but they're delicate things.
Tea, like empires,
centuries of work can be undone
by the smallest of oversights.
[Ackerson sighs]
If you're concerned
about Reach,
then the narrative
remains intact.
A ship penetrated our airspace
less than an hour ago.
I'm told whoever piloted
the vessel
showed some familiarity
with our defense network.
I hope that
you're not blaming me.
They landed less
than 15 kilometers
from where we are now.
Send a team.
Did I mention that, uh,
one of our agents from Aleria
is convinced he saw
Catherine Halsey
boarding a ship
of the same description?
If I told you how many Catherine
Halsey sightings we have--
Nineteen hours ago.
Impossible.
She's dead.
Of course,
he could have been mistaken.
It could be anyone traveling
with, and I quote,
"A scarred man."
Perhaps the largest human
he'd ever seen.
That's not possible.
You keep saying that.
You think that he's alive,
that he's here on this planet?
I suppose we're going
to find out.
[scope optics whirring]
[portentous music rises]
[theme music rises]
[gunfire and explosions]
[heavy breathing]
[grenade powers up]
[grunts]
[muffled explosions]
Pause simulation.
- What are you doing?
- [Kai] I couldn't sleep.
Kai...
[exasperated sigh]
you can't keep coming here.
I mean, don't you think
it's a bit morbid?
- [Kai] I'm training.
- You're punishing yourself.
[gasps and breathes heavily]
Why weren't we here?
All those people we lost.
[Kai panting]
My team.
They're all gone.
[Ackerson]
It didn't just happen to you.
What?
No one escapes
this kind of tragedy.
None of the recruits survived
the Corvette simulation.
They will.
They just need time, preparation.
I need to know we're not sending
them on a suicide mission.
Did you ever ask
for a guarantee?
Did he?
Master Chief is gone.
But you are making the next
generation in his image.
They're not Chief.
I can't make them Spartans.
End simulation.
They are Spartans.
And it's your job
to make them believe it.
[footsteps]
May I have that back?
What is it that you want?
[Soren] What she always wants.
Leverage.
I know where
they took your son.
[somber music rises]
[distant birds cry]
[Soren] This is where
Halsey says it all started.
ONI.
What do you know
about this place?
Onyx.
No maps. No records.
No history.
Just rumors.
Just whispers.
[wildlife]
[Kwan panting softly]
[Soren] They've got Kessler.
There.
Remind you of anything?
They're still making Spartans.
- [pebbles tumble]
- [gasps softly]
[wind gusting]
[ominous music]
[dramatic music playing]
[Kwan gasping]
[Laera] Halsey's gone!
[Soren] It doesn't matter.
We don't need her.
- I know where Kessler is.
- [John] You better get going.
[Laera]
What are you talking about?
[dramatic music rises]
Soren, we need to move.
[Soren] I can see
what you're thinking.
Don't.
You're all banged up.
You don't have your armor.
Go get your son.
- [gunshots]
- [Kwan gasps]
[man]
Right there!
[panting]
[bullets strike nearby]
[grunts]
- [gunshots]
- [men shouting]
[dramatic music playing]
[grunting and yelling]
[screams]
[dramatic music rises, falls]
[disengages firing mechanism]
[weapon drops]
[man] Stand down!
[ominous music playing]
[footsteps in snow]
[Laera] What is it?
[breathing heavily]
[wind rises]
[Kwan gasps]
[distant bird caws]
I...
I know this.
What is it doing here?
- [submachine gun fire]
- [gasps]
[distant man] Stand down!
[shouting indistinctly]
Shit.
[screams]
[gasps]
[whispers] Oh, my God.
[panting softly]
I'm okay.
[Halsey] If you say so.
[Kwan] What is...
How are...
What?
Where are we?
What are you doing?
- How'd you know that was there?
- [latch creaks]
Still works.
After 20 years. Take it.
You've been here before?
Yes. I used to practically
live here.
What is this place?
It's where it all began.
You know, I remember you.
I'm flattered.
- You ruined my best work.
- What?
Before you, John was consistent.
Dependable. A Spartan.
Then he met you
and he became unpredictable.
- Oh, sorry about that.
- Oh, don't be.
Sometimes the introduction
of a new variable,
however insignificant,
can be the catalyst
for huge change.
[Kwan] Thanks?
[ominous music rises]
- [sizzling]
- [growls]
[Uto 'Mdama] There seems to be a
problem with our communications.
I have been unable to contact
High Charity or the Fleet.
When do you expect this
malfunction to be resolved?
It is not a malfunction.
It is my command.
Oh? And why does the Arbiter
command our silence?
Because our mission demands it, priest.
Where are we going?
Perhaps you do not know. Perhaps
you should consult your pet.
My direction comes from
the Hierarchs themselves.
As does your shame.
Some say the Arbiter has lost
his faith in the Prophets
and looks to this human
for guidance.
The human means nothing to me.
I would gladly put these
baseless insinuations to rest
with the stroke of my sword.
[sword whooshes]
She is not mine to kill.
She belongs to the Hierarchs.
Then I will ask their permission
when I return to High Charity.
Which will be...
Soon.
The priest is suspicious.
You have communed
with the Keystone?
Of course.
I am the Blessed One.
[door opens]
[Cortana]
Do you think he knows?
That you're lying.
[combat noise and chaos]
[Okada]
I told you, I can't see!
[Perez]
Where are they?
[Mullins]
Concentrate your fire.
[Perez]
Mullins!
- [gunfire]
- [Okada] Look out!
- [explosion]
- [Perez] Move!
- [Gilroy] Return fire!
- [Mullins] We have to move!
- [Perez] Wait!
- [Mullins] We can't stay here.
[Perez]
We need numbers before we push.
[Mullins] I give the orders!
[Perez] Suppressive fire!
[Mullins] Move it! Now!
[gunfire]
[screams]
[Okada]
Moving! Moving!
[Mullins]
Perez, lock that corridor down.
Okada, Hayes, Olsson,
assault the bridge.
- [Perez] No, ma'am.
- [Mullins] What?
We assault that room
by the book,
they're gonna
pick us apart again.
We all have to go. Same time.
[Mullins]
We stick to the tactics.
[indistinct shouting]
[Perez]
The tactics are bullshit!
We gotta assault in force!
[Okada]
Like the fucking bees, man!
[Perez] Exactly.
[Gilroy] Great.
We're all gonna die.
[Perez]
If we send enough bodies,
it might buy you some time
to spike the system.
[Mullins] You're out of line!
[grunts]
[Spartan III]
Richer is down!
[Mullins]
Gilroy, get up here!
[Perez] We run the same plan,
it'll end the same way.
[Mullins] Perez! What the hell
do you think you're doing?
[Perez]
What it takes. Frag out!
[explosion]
- On me!
- [Spartan III] Move it!
Come on, you can do
better than that.
[Spartan III]
Contact. Rear.
[Perez] This is Javelin-Four.
We've reached the bridge.
[dramatic music playing]
[Perez] Do it!
[spring clicks]
[grunts]
[massive whooshing]
- [energy crackles]
- [Gilroy] Holy shit!
What do we do now?
[Mullins]
Get the hell out of here.
Beginning exfil.
Javelin, on me.
Perez!
You waiting on another medal?
Let's go.
[Perez breathing heavily]
[panting]
[Perez]
Where's the Covenant?
Where are they?
[Mullins] I'm not waiting
around to find out.
See you on the other side.
[Spartans cheering]
- [Gilroy] We did it!
- [Spartan III] Whoo!
[Mullins]
That's how it's done!
- [excited shouts]
- [Spartan III] Finally!
Boom!
[Spartan III]
That's what I'm talking about.
[excited shouts]
- Congratulations.
- Ma'am!
The exfil. It was too easy.
Don't get cocky.
No, that's not what I meant.
After we spiked the system,
we had no more enemy contact.
Take the win, Corporal.
[dramatic music rises]
[cell door slams]
[door lock unlatches]
[Briggs] Master Chief.
Nice to see you again.
Last time we met,
you had a weapon
pointed in my face.
I prefer this, don't you?
Eleven of my men
are incapacitated.
One of them may die.
Usually when people
are hurt in combat,
it's 'cause
they're poorly trained...
or poorly led.
So, which was it?
With those Spartans,
your Cobalt friends.
You know, when we found them,
they still had full mags.
Never even got a shot off.
I'm beginning to think Spartans
aren't so scary after all.
I want to see Parangosky.
Who?
- Clip him in.
- [man] Yes, Captain.
[John]
You can tell her I'm coming.
[Briggs]
Yeah, right. I'll do that.
[door clanking]
[man 1] All right, locking
down.
- [man 2] Securing right.
- [cords zipping]
[man screams]
[grunts]
[grunting]
[shouting]
[gasping]
[grunts]
[John] I wouldn't.
[effort grunts]
[gags]
[sharp grunt]
[soft clicking]
[optics trill and whish]
[Ackerson] This was recorded
just over an hour ago.
I'm sorry.
I didn't want
to show it to you, but...
I didn't know what else to do.
He's alive.
[Ackerson]
Seems so, yes.
How?
We're not exactly sure.
But I'm afraid
the most likely explanation
isn't one
you or I want to hear.
Do you remember when I asked
you about John's interaction
with the Covenant agent?
Kai?
You said that there was
no reason
to question
Master Chief's loyalty.
I have to ask if you were
being entirely truthful.
When we got
back from Sanctuary...
he told me he saw Makee.
In the fog.
Before they glassed it.
- But I didn't think he really--
- [Ackerson] It's okay, Kai.
I understand.
You're a good soldier.
And he's the Chief.
Or was.
What does this all mean?
From what we can ascertain,
it would seem
that John-117 maintained
his connection
to the Covenant agent
known as Makee.
And it appears now
that they are working together.
No. No, they can't.
Intelligence places Makee
on Reach during the attack.
- [Kai] No.
- John escaped from Reach.
- How did that happen?
- I don't know.
How did that happen, Kai,
when everyone else--
- [Kai] You're wrong!
- He's here now.
On this planet.
In this facility.
Why is he here? Why is he
attacking UNSC soldiers?
- I don't know!
- Why?
I don't know!
If you have an explanation,
I would love to hear it.
[dramatic music]
Now, I'm going
to tell you something,
and this information
is highly classified.
We know the Covenant
attacked the Visegrad Relay
for a very specific objective:
to cover their assault
on Sword Base,
where they captured
one of the Artifacts.
Fortunately, we were able
to exfiltrate the other Artifact
before the planet fell.
Where is it?
It's here.
[dramatic music plays]
[Cortana]
All civilizations learned
that the position of any object
can be determined relative to
three points in the night sky.
Here.
I feel it here.
I suppose that's
as good a guess as any.
Do you mock me?
You do know what will
become of me
- if I can't find--
- Yes.
And what do you suppose
will become of you?
If you were to use the Artifact
to project yourself
back to the Halo,
you could determine its location
in the stars, the same way--
I can't.
Can't what?
Find it.
I try to go there in my mind.
I touch the Artifact
and nothing happens.
I'm fallen.
I'm being punished.
My gift is gone.
Perhaps we should consider
rational possibilities.
- Now you mock my pain.
- You've seen the Halo before.
I have a record of it here.
[graphics trill and whish]
[soft sob]
[sobbing]
Turn it off.
- I thought it might be help--
- I said turn it off.
I can't go there without him.
[dramatic music rises]
Something changed.
I don't know.
Something between us...
shifted.
I touch the Keystone now.
I look for him,
all I see is the dark.
Perhaps I can help.
I would just need access to your
ship's transmission array.
- Do you think me a fool?
- I do not.
Then don't ask me to trust you.
Can you afford not to?
[dramatic music playing]
[indistinct lively chatter]
[chatter continues]
[forceful exhalation]
[lively chatter continues]
[Kwan] You know, Spartans are
the reason my mother's dead.
- Please, can we skip this part?
- What part?
The part where I say
how sorry I am
about some person that
I've never met,
from some place that
I've never been.
The part where you say
how callous I am
for having said that.
Because the truth is,
this is all being played out
on a much larger scale.
And when we get to the end
of this tunnel,
you might actually understand.
This isn't meant to be here.
This shouldn't be here.
- [Kwan] It's a wall.
- [Halsey] I know what it is.
But it shouldn't be there.
The whole cave system
has been changed.
- [Kwan] Uh-huh.
- [wind gusts]
Right.
- This way.
- [Halsey] What is it?
Just a feeling.
[doors whoosh]
[graphics trill and whish]
Load CIC secured zones.
[doors whoosh]
[footsteps]
We lost Vannak.
Riz?
Alive.
[Kai] But not here.
You're alone?
Am I?
I would have given anything
to be there on Reach.
You know that.
But you weren't.
- I had orders.
- From whom?
Parangosky?
From Ackerson?
They're responsible, Kai.
For Reach. For Vannak.
The Covenant's responsible.
The Covenant
didn't take our armor.
The Covenant didn't leave us
down there to die.
What are you talking about?
I'm talking about the people
who sent you down here.
To me. ONI.
They knew an attack was coming.
They let the whole planet burn.
Who sent you?
- What?
- Was it Makee?
She was on Sanctuary.
She was at Visegrad.
She was at FLEETCOM.
- Kai...
- Is she here now?
No matter what I say,
you're not gonna believe me.
I want to believe you.
That's not enough.
Believing me means seeing them
for what they are.
I gotta take you in, Chief.
I'm here for Parangosky.
You can take me in
when I'm done with her.
I can't let you do that.
Well...
I guess you have your orders.
That's right.
That's what it means
to be a soldier.
You're more than that.
[grunts and groans]
How long have we been
together, Kai?
A long time.
And what's that worth now?
[quiet thunk]
[mechanisms engage]
I guess not enough.
[Kai] I guess not.
[John grunts]
This only ends one way.
[John groaning]
There's no use in fighting me.
Don't worry.
I won't.
[John grunts]
Vannak died...
the moment Halsey took him.
Everything was decided.
His life ended when he was 6.
So did mine.
So did yours.
We just didn't know it.
[grunting]
- [Kai] Stay down!
- Ohh!
[John groans and laughs]
That's it.
Don't ask questions.
Don't even think about what's
on the other side of the gun.
Just be their Spartan.
[bones crack, John groans]
[Kai] I know what I am.
What are you now?
Where does the Spartan end,
Kai?
And where do you begin?
[violent groan]
[resounding impact]
This is over, John.
Where's the girl I grew up
with?
[grunts]
[groaning]
[Kai] Stop. Please.
Go ahead.
[Kai] I don't want this.
I know.
An order's an order.
[Kai grunts, inhales]
Do it.
[hesitant gasp]
[sighs]
[yells]
[crash]
[breathing heavily]
[dramatic crescendo]
[Ackerson sighs]
Don't pretend you had a choice.
The attack on Reach
was inevitable.
And he was becoming impossible
to control.
Master Chief is gone.
But his memory, his legend,
will make a million
more Spartans in his place.
And a million more
is what we need to win.
This is your program now.
You made it.
This is what it costs.
I used to feel doubt.
I used to feel guilt.
- And I suppose my concern--
- Are you a religious man?
Not particularly, no.
Then I wouldn't worry about it.
[footsteps depart]
[door opens forcefully]
Admiral, we're receiving
an encrypted transmission.
[Parangosky]
Have you identified the source?
Unknown, ma'am.
It's not a UNSC frequency.
[man]
Data wave outside our spectrum.
High volume.
Tracking point of origin.
Ma'am, our communications
may be compromised.
Give me the room.
- [man] Ma'am?
- Get out.
[dramatic music playing]
[John groans softly]
- [electricity crackling]
- [Cortana] Chief?
[voice echoing]
Master Chief.
[Parangosky] Hello, Cortana.
[Cortana] Admiral.
Where are you?
[electricity crackling]
- Where are you?
- [Cortana] I'm right here.
Where?
- [Cortana] Here.
- [John] Cortana.
[Cortana] Yes, Master Chief?
You don't look so good.
What did they do to you?
Nothing that I didn't
sign up for.
[Cortana]
I need you to get up, Chief.
[affirmative grunt]
[soft groan]
[loud clatter]
They're gone, Cortana.
They're all gone.
[Cortana] But I'm here.
- Yeah.
- I'm here now.
Something terrible
is about to happen.
[soft groan]
What do you want me
to do about it?
You're the Master Chief.
Not anymore.
The Covenant's going to find
the Halo, Chief.
They're going to use it.
It is imperative
that you get there first.
I'm with them now.
They're almost there.
I'm with Makee.
[breathing heavily]
Makee.
I'm with the one
they call the Arbiter.
The one who--
who killed Vannak.
[grunts]
Tell me how to find him.
You need to touch the Artifact.
They're connected.
I don't know where it is.
That's why you have me.
[Cortana disappears]
[John sighs]
[John] Cortana?
Cortana?
[door sensor chimes]
[doors whoosh]
[Cortana] I was able to gain
access to the Covenant systems.
I'm transmitting
location data now.
[graphics trill and whish]
When will the Covenant Fleet
arrive at your location?
Soon.
I believe this fulfills
all of my mission parameters.
It does.
I imagine the UNSC
will be able to attack
the Covenant Fleet now.
I thought you might
be interested.
I've simulated the attack
many times.
Even with the element
of surprise,
- the chances of success are--
- Thank you, Cortana.
Will you be needing
anything else from me?
No.
Because I'm always happy
to be useful.
You've done well.
We're in your debt.
What shall I do now?
As agreed, you'll remain where
you are with the Covenant
and provide information to us
until you're no longer
able to do so.
Is that clear?
Yes, Admiral.
Will I be...
remembered?
How could we forget?
[Makee]
Nothing can be undone.
Have no regret.
[distant tapping echoes]
- [Halsey] Wait.
- [Kwan] What's wrong?
[Halsey gathers breath]
[distant voices speak]
[indistinct chatter]
[Kwan]
Who are these people?
Halsey, stop.
[dramatic music playing]
[Miranda] Halsey.
[Halsey] Do you have any idea
what you're doing here?
[Miranda]
Finishing what you couldn't.
You gave them my research.
[scoffs]
Did you really think
you were the only person
worthy of saving humankind?
These people lack the ability
or the expertise--
Yeah, your work has been
very valuable to all of us.
Without your research,
I never would have been able
to discover your mistake.
[dramatic music rises]
[music subsides]
[Laera]
Soren, what is this place?
Thermopylae.
What?
[Laera] Is that...?
- Soren?
- [distant door opens forcefully]
[Soren] They're coming.
- [Laera] Who?
- We should get out of here.
I don't understand.
Is Kessler here?
[footsteps]
[Kai exhales]
[clink]
[spring clicks]
[Ackerson] I shouldn't
have sent you down there.
I saw what happened with John.
It's my fault.
Put it all on me.
The Javelin Team
completed the sim today.
You see?
I told you they would.
It was just a matter of time.
And after they planted
the spike,
they got to the evac ship
without a hitch.
- Outstanding.
- Is it?
In my experience,
the only thing harder
than getting on a Covenant ship
is getting off of one.
Did you manipulate
the simulation?
The simulation performed
perfectly, as did your Spartans.
You let them win.
Kai, this simulation
doesn't reflect reality.
It conditions soldiers.
I designed it to be difficult.
To push our recruits
to their absolute limit.
And at that moment,
when death seems like
the only outcome,
to reward them.
To give them hope.
Now you want to know
if your Spartans have a chance.
And I am telling you
that they do.
But only if they have belief.
And that is what you have
given them.
You should be proud.
[powerful footsteps]
And what did you give
the people on Reach?
What are you--
Initiate simulation 142-A,
FLEETCOM defense.
[system whirrs]
What are you doing?
John said that you
left him here for dead.
Without his armor.
You saw what he did
to those soldiers.
- You can't trust him.
- But I do.
I always have.
He said that you knew
the Covenant were coming.
That you let
the whole planet burn.
What happened on Reach
was tragic.
And inevitable.
Sometimes events
are beyond our control.
And in those moments...
it's all we can do...
to save what we can.
[portentous music rises]
As I saved you.
End simulation.
You're too late.
I've sent in the Black Ops
to finish what you...
[suspenseful music playing]
[trilling]
[doors slam closed]
[woman] You can't be in here!
[all shouting]
[system trills and whishes]
[doors whirr]
[guard 1] Stop!
- [high-pitched ringing sound]
- Aah!
[guard 2] Hey, you!
Stop! Last warning!
[doors close forcefully]
[gunshots]
This is Research One, we have
an intruder in Sublevel 4.
Repeat, intruder
in Sublevel 4.
[John]
How are you doing this?
[Cortana] I have a lot of
capabilities. Did you forget?
No, I remember.
Are you gonna get that?
Cortana?
[system trills]
[digits clacking]
[doors whirr]
[dramatic music playing]
[Uto 'Mdama grunts]
What is the meaning of this?
Your pet professes ignorance.
It is an insult to you.
Silence, priest.
A transmission went out from
the ship, not long ago.
I know nothing of this.
Perhaps you know something
of this?
The transmission came
from this human device.
And we tracked it toward
their planets.
I know not how... See my heart.
I would never betray you.
[growls]
Do what must be done.
It has no honor.
It requires no ceremony.
You carry enough shame as it is.
[sword whooshes]
[gasps]
Those of you who are
true believers,
you will stand with me.
The rest of you will die.
[yells]
[swords slicing]
[dramatic music playing]
[end theme music playing]
[signature theme plays]